UsingGHbranchingmodel.md, before:

﻿Purpose of explicit numbering of versions
=========================================

Usually, I number historical versions of a document for easy future reference to
its content.

What is updated from version to version
=======================================

There are five important aspects of a current document that may change in the
future versions, but may need to be preserved for re-use: new section, new idea,
new supportive materials (figure, table, reference), new phrasing, new editorial
changes.  Usually, different people work on it separately.

Using Git-branching model
=========================

Using "release" as a metaphor for a document's current version, I can say that
release branches support preparation of a new article release: approving new features, editing for
style, last-minute dotting of i’s and crossing t’s, and preparing meta-data for
a release (version number, build dates, etc.).

Feature branches will be used to introduce new sections, insert new ideas, add
new supportive material, revise for phrasing, and editing. These could be used
for the next release, and for future releases. The target release for these
features may be unknown at that point, and will be either used or discarded. The
importance of having feature branches though is having people involved in
parallel activities. (I wrote both books this way, where up to 5 people were
working in parallel during 2-3 years).

Naming convention
=================

Commit message:

added phrase on minor changes

UsingGHbranchingmodel.md, after:

Purpose of explicit numbering of versions
=========================================

Usually, I number historical versions of a document for easy future reference to its content.

What is updated from version to version
=======================================

There are five important aspects of a current document that may change in the future versions, but may need to be preserved for re-use: 
* new section, 
* new idea,
* new supportive materials (figure, table, reference, quote), 
* new phrasing, 
* new editorial changes.  

Usually, different people work on these aspects separately.

Using Git-branching model
=========================

Using "release" as a metaphor for a current version of an article, I can say that release branches support preparation of a new article release: approving new features, editing for style, proof-reading, last-minute dotting of i’s and crossing t’s, and preparing meta-data for a release (version number, dates, authors, etc.).

GH *Feature branches* will be used to introduce new sections, insert new ideas, add new supportive material, revise phrasing, and copy editing. These updates could be used for the next release, or for future releases. The target release dates for these features releases may be unknown at that point, and these updates will be either used or discarded. The importance of having *feature branches* though is having collaborators involved in parallel activities. (I wrote both books in this way, where up to 5 people were working in parallel during 2-3 years).

Minor edits of the current releases will not be leading to changing their versions.

Naming convention
=================
