# Causal perspective in Health Services Research

Causal reasoning in science relies on the premise that for each observed
phenomenon, there exists an underlying mechanism that links cause and effect. In
health services research, the description of such a mechanism involves
specification of the structures, processes, and outcomes of medical care, as
exemplied by the works of Avedis Donabedian (1919--2000). Donabedian held that
the structures of care are the facilities, equipment, services, and human
resources needed to provide care, as well as the qualications of the care
providers. The processes of care are the clinical and managerial activities,
steps, and procedures involved in the provision of treatment within the defined
structures of care. Finally, the outcomes of care are the results of the
activities through which medical care is provided. Therefore, within the
Donabedian triad, causal mechanisms explain at least two sets of dependencies:
those between structures and processes and those between processes and outcomes.

Operations research conducted in the second half of the 20th century was
instrumental in revealing the links between structures and processes in various
social and industrial systems. The paradigm and analytic approaches of the field
gradually came to be included in *Methods* sections of the health services
research literature concerned with improving the quality of care. At the same
time came the realization that processes of medical care differ from those of
manufacturing; variability in patients and reliance on expert judgment were
cited among the most significant differences. The link between a clinical
process and treatment outcomes has proven the most challenging for operations
analysis because of uncertainties inherent in diagnosis and choice of treatment,
as well as the stochastic nature of the response to treatment exhibited by many
medical conditions.

During the same period, health services research created a solid foundation for
empirical analysis of the outcomes of care delivered to patient populations.
First, clinical evaluative studies have documented wide variations in treatments
and outcomes in most health care systems. For example, it has been reported that
20% of surgical procedures performed have no clear benefit for patients;
conversely, a substantial number of patients do not receive treatments that
could improve their condition. Second, it has been established that even in
cases where there is an indication for a specic treatment and patients receive
the treatment and experience the anticipated benefit, the particular response
may differ from one patient to another. In specialties such as surgery and
oncology, this individual-level variation may also be related to the potential
harm of treatment, such as complications or death. The next milestone was
establishing factors that influence the outcomes of care. For example,
researchers investigating the link between postoperative processes and outcomes
have shown that lack of improvement in a patient's condition might result from
factors related to either the condition or the clinical process, or both.

The structure-process-outcome model provides a convenient idealization for
evaluation of complex interventions in health care. Usually, such interventions
constitute changes in one or more signicant aspects of care delivery. Within the
model, interventions could be thought of as replacements of one configuration of
the structure and process of care with another. Replacing a configuration could
be further viewed as modifying some parameters of the structure, such as
procedural volume, or the process, such as time from hospital arrival to
angioplasty.

To illustrate this idea, suppose variable $Z$ characterizes the process of
care under different policies, so that $Z_0$  and  $Z_1$ represent
configurations set by policy $0$ and $1$. The effect of replacing policy
$0$ with policy $1$ could be then evaluated by comparing the outcomes of
care delivery corresponding to values of $Z$ set by each policy. Within the
Donabedian model, health care evaluation therefore constitutes the effort to
answer the following question, *What would be the change in outcome if variable
$Z$ is forced to change from $Z_0$ to $Z_1$?*
