Structural equations model relationships between connected nodes in the
directed acyclic graph as functions of one variable onto another.

### Graphical causal models

Recent advances in the area of causal inference have been prompted by an
understanding the connection between the directed acyclic graph and the
factorization of a joint probability function. A directed acyclic graph
depicts the causal structure of multivariate data. In such graphs, nodes
represent variables and arrows show direct effects between the variables
that they connect. An arrow drawn from variable $X$ to variable $Y$
shows a direct effect of $X$ on $Y$, and no effect of $Y$ on $X$. In
graph theory, $X$ is said to be a parent of $Y$.

The causal structure of directed acyclic graphs can be linked to the
observational data by the Markov assumption. This assumption states
that, conditional on its parents, a variable is independent of any other
variable in the graph. Therefore, the dependencies among connected nodes
in the graph define the set of the conditional probabilities of
variables on their parents. The product of these conditional
probabilities is said to be the factorization of the joint probability
function of the variables.

### Functional causal models

To express the directionality of dependency, the equation is interpreted
with a causal graph, in which arrows are drawn from causes to their
effects, and more importantly, the absence of an arrow makes the
empirical claim that Nature assigns values to one variable irrespective
of another. A direct acyclic graph shows the presence of direct
influence of $X$ on $Y$, and the absence of influence of $Y$ on $X$.

The structural equations specify the mechanism of influences by
deterministic functional equations, and probabilities are introduced
through unobserved random variables in these equations.

$$ x_i=f_i(pa_i,u_i), \; i = 1,\ldots,n $$

Each equation represents an autonomous dependency of $x_i$ on parents
$pa_i$, and $u_i$ stands for all factors, other than the parents in
question, that could possibly affect $x_i$ when $pa_i$ is held constant.
Unlike a system of algebraic equations, structural equations represent
assignment of values to $x_i$ given values of $pa_i$ and $u_i$.

### Structural equations in causal reasoning

Pearl proposed that structural equations be used for answering causal
queries arising from directed acyclic graphs.27 He noted that structural
equations present formulas for computing potential outcomes under
various policies.24 To evaluate a potential value of the outcome, the
equation for the variable representing a policy is replaced with its
counterfactual value, and the values for the outcome variables are then
computed, keeping all other equations unchanged.

This technique of replacing an equation for the causal variable with a
fixed value captures the notion of controlled experiments because each
structural equation corresponds to a mechanism linking multiple causes
to studied effects. Pearl has shown that a structural equation model
enables estimation of the causal effect of one variable on another, on
the basis of knowledge of the conditional probabilities derived from
observational studies.
